datafusion-python 46.0.0 announcement (#65)
apache/datafusion-site: content/blog/2025-03-30-datafusion-python-46.0.0.md

[datafusion-python 43.1.0]: https://datafusion.apache.org/blog/2024/12/14/datafusion-python-43.1.0/
[datafusion-python 46.0.0]: https://pypi.org/project/datafusion/46.0.0/
[changelogs]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/tree/main/dev/changelog

## Easier file reading

In these releases we have introduced two new ways to more easily read files into
DataFrames.

PR [#982] introduced a series of easier read functions for Parquet, JSON, CSV, and
AVRO files. This introduces a concept of a global context that is available by
default when using these methods. Now instead of creating a default Session
Context and then calling the read methods, you can simply import these read
alternative methods and begin working with your DataFrames. Below is an example of
how easy to use this new approach is.

```python
from datafusion.io import read_parquet
df = read_parquet(path="./examples/tpch/data/customer.parquet")
```

PR [#980] adds a method for setting up a session context to use URL tables. With
this enabled, you can use a path to a local file as a table name. An example
of how to use this is demonstrated in the following snippet.

```python
import datafusion

> ctx = datafusion.SessionContext().enable_url_table()

Reviewer: FYI @goldmedal  (this is exposing your great work via datafusion-python 🐱 🎉 )

df = ctx.table("./examples/tpch/data/customer.parquet")
```

[#982]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/982
[#980]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/980

## Registering Table Views

> DataFusion supports registering a logical plan as a view with a session context. This
> allows for work flows to create views in one part of the work flow and pass the session
> context around to other places where that logical plan can be reused. This is an useful
> feature for building up complex workflows and for code clarity. PR [#1016] enables this
> feature in `datafusion-python`.

Reviewer: Here is a minor suggestion on wording:

```suggestion
DataFusion supports registering a logical plan as a view with a session context. This
allows creating views in one part of your work flow and passinng the session
context to other places where that logical plan can be reused. This is an useful
feature for building up complex workflows and for code clarity. PR [#1016] enables this
feature in `datafusion-python`.
```

For example, supposing you have a DataFrame called `df1`, you could use this code snippet
to register the view and then use it in another place:

```python
ctx.register_view("view1", df1)
```

And then in another portion of your code which has access to the same session context
you can retrive the DataFrame with:

```
df2 = ctx.table("view1")
```

[#1016]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/1016

## Asynchronous Iteration of Record Batches

Retrieving a `RecordBatch` from a `RecordBatchStream` was a synchronous call, which would
require the end user's code to wait for the data retrieval. This is described in
[Issue 974]. We continue to support this as a synchronous iterator, but we have also added
in the ability to retrieve the `RecordBatch` using the Python asynchronous `anext`
function.

[Issue 974]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/issues/974

> ## Default Compression for Parquet files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Default ZSTD Compression for Parquet files
```

) -> pa.Array:
    pass
```

[#1040]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/1040
[#1061]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/1061

## `uv` package management

[uv] is an extremely fast Python package manager, written in Rust. In the previous version
of `datafusion-python` we had a combination of settings of PyPi and Conda. Instead, we
switch to using [uv] is our primary method for dependency management.

For most users of DataFusion, this change will be transparent. You can still install
via `pip` or `conda`. For developers, the instructions in the repository have been updated.

[uv]: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv

## Code cleanup

In an effort to improve our code cleanliness and ensure we are following Python best
practices, we use [ruff] to perform Python linting. Until now we enabled only a portion
of the available linters available. In PRs [#1055] and [#1062], we enable many more
of these linters and made code improvements to ensure we are following these
recommendations.

[ruff]: https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/
[#1055]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/1055
[#1062]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/pull/1062

> ## Improved Jupyter Notebook rendering

Reviewer: this is really cool

of `datafusion-python` with relatively low effort.
- External catalog and schema providers: For users who wish to go beyond table providers
and have an entire custom catalog with schema, Issue [#1091] tracks the progress of exposing
this in Python. With this work, if you have already written a Rust based table catalog you
will be able to interface it in Python similar to the work described for the table
providers above.

This is only a sample of the great work that is being done. If there are features you would
love to see, we encourage you to open an issue and join us as we build something wonderful.

[#1017]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/issues/1017
[datafusion-contrib #279]: https://github.com/datafusion-contrib/datafusion-table-providers/issues/279
[#1091]: https://github.com/apache/datafusion-python/issues/1091
[datafusion-contrib]: https://github.com/datafusion-contrib

## Appreciation

We would like to thank everyone who has helped with these releases through their helpful
conversations, code review, issue descriptions, and code authoring. We would especially
like to thank the following authors of PRs who made these releases possible, listed in

> alphabetical order by username: [@chenkovsky], [@CrystalZhou0529], [@ion-elgreco],

Reviewer: FYI  @chenkovsky, @CrystalZhou0529, @ion-elgreco, @jsai28, @kevinjqliu, @kylebarron, @kosiew, @nirnayroy, and @Spaarsh
